---
title: "\"The Great Divorce\" by C.S. Lewis"
description: "Retrospective and analysis of C.S. Lewis's \"The Great Divorce\""
pubDate: "May 10, 2026"
heroImage: "/book-blog/the-great-divorce-cs-lewis.jpg"
---
### Introduction
On Easter Sunday of this year, I celebrated the commercial version of the holiday with some of my cousins and extended family. They are a Catholic family, with a strong history within the church and religion, so the holiday has a much deeper religious significance to them than I have seen in most other households. They go to church for most of the morning, and assit with the christening of new members, but they do also enjoy the pagan aspects that were adopted, such as the egg hunt, the candy, and the large dinner (although that was probably also part of the Catholic holiday). I was raised in an agnostic/atheistic household, where we learned and explored many holdiays across religions, but, as expected of an upper-middle class family in a largely conservative town, we mostly focused on the Americanized, Christian-based holidays such as Christmas and Easter as well as the other federally-recongnized holidays. Due to the nature of my upbringing, I always celebrated these in the commercialized ways with gifts, candy and holiday-specific foods, without fully acknowledging or comprehending the significance of these events within other religions. This year, I got to see how a much more religious family celebrates such an importantant Christian holiday, and what it means to them. 

One thing that my aunt and uncle do for my cousins every year, is give them each an easter basket filled with the usual candy and small toys, but what may be unique, is they also give them each a book. This year, due to this being my first year out of college within driving range of their house, but not my parent's, they invited me over to celebrate, and thus, I recieved a basket and book as well. While I am not familiar enough to know if the books given to my cousins are always relgiously themed, the book I receieved was C.S. Lewis's "The Great Divorce". At first, I thought this was going to be some helpful guide or meaningful story exploring the marital divorce of two people, but as I read the synopsis and talked with my uncle, I realized it does not focus on the relationship between two people, but two places: Heaven and Hell. 

## The Book
The book starts off with the narator, C.S. Lewis, waking up wandering around a vast city of dreary houses and streets that seem surprisingly empty. The sky is always a dreary gray, and the few people he runs into all seem to have some sort of vice ailing them and preventing them from being happy. They all seem to be perpetually downtrodden, or reveling in the temporary relief of their elected vice. Most seem to fall near or within what most might consider to be the stereotypical "Seven Deadly Sins" or just classic christian sin (one of these being androgyny, which we might discuss later). 
Eventually, Lewis (or the unnamed narrator who is an obvious stand-in for Lewis) stumbles across a queue of people, all waiting for a bus at a stop. As he has been wondering for an unknowable amount of time, and has what appears to be endless time to spend, he decides to add himself to the line. While waiting, we get to watch multiple people quarrel and fight, leaving or being removed from the line by their various brawls. The fighting does not seem to bother most other people within the line, and in most people, Lewis included, only see these people leaving as a way to advance their own position. 
After a short time, the bus finally arrives and it is described as "blazing with golden light, hearldically coloured", with a driver who is described as "full of light". Lewis easily manages to grab a seat near the back, and is quickly approached by a young man. This youth talks with Lewis about their destination and how most who take the bus, end up returning the the rainy town not long after. During this conversation, we also learn that the town is in-fact purpetually in the rainy, pre-dawn state and expands for eternity, without any changes to the residences, streets or weather. We also learn that the youth had killed himself recently and that everyone up to this point is a deceased soul. This leads into a conversation addressing the odd reality of the place and we learn that all citizens of the town are able to conjure up whatever they might want, from food to a house, but everything seems to be missing its primary purpose, and is no more than a way for the souls to "own" whatever they desire.
Eventually, after travelling upwards for a while, the bus approaches an enormous cliff face, over which is an eden of nature, with grass, trees, and a distant mountain range. Upon arrival, the passengers brawl their way out (to be expected from the nature of the people from the gray city), and Lewis disembarks last, not wanting to be involved in the fight and not being in any sort of rush. The first thing that is noticed by the narrator, is the etherial state of all the souls who came from the city (from here-on will be called "ghosts"), Lewis included, against the solidness of the environment. Not only are the ghosts semi-transparent, but they also cannot seem to influence anything around them in any meaningful way. The grass does not yield to their steps, and a simple leaf is near impossible to lift. 
After taking in the clearing around him, Lewis notices a group of solid, brightly-shining people approaching the group of ghosts. All seem able to interact with nature around them in a way that is to be expected of the residents of a realm and are described as perfectly content with their current bodies. Various ghosts are approached by these beings (from here we will call them spirits), and there always seems to be some sort of connection between the ghost and the spirit, though often it is noticed that the relationship between the two when both were alive, was a strenuous one. Lewis is not directly approached by any of these spirits, but gets to observe and overhear some of their conversations. After a while, Lewis wanders off as many of the ghosts that arrived with the bus return to the vehicle. 
Lewis wanders for an unmentioned length of time, occasionally running into other ghost-spirit conversations, while battling the unmoving plants and unforgiving environment. Eventually, he runs into a spirit that he recognizes, a Scottish author, George MacDonald, whom becomes his guide in this strange land. The two continue wandering and observing other ghosts and spirits, and Lewis is able to query his new guide on the state of the realm they find themselves in, and they discuss all of the meetings they come across. It is in this exploration and discussion that we learn about the nature of the two environments.
In these conversations, we learn that the place they met is what some might consider heaven, and the grey city is what most consider Hell or Purgatory, depending on their view-point. Through the observances of other ghosts, we see that to get to heaven, all one needs to do is accept the help and suggestions of the glowing spirits (current residents of heaven) and relinquish their earthly relationships or desires. We watch as most (all but one) ghosts refuse the help, being too stubborn with their desires to accept help and join the endlessly patient, kind, and happy residents of heaven.  
In the end, the conversation between Lewis and MacDonald turns to the scale of both realms. Both Heaven and Hell are infinitely vast, but Heaven is infinitely more vast than Hell, where the entirerty of Hell is no larger than a single atom compared to Heaven. When the bus of ghosts arrived in heaven, they did not "fly" to the realm, but simply grew in size to be able to comprehend it. This is why no one but Jesus is able to visit Hell and help their loved ones up to a place of infinite joy and forgiveness, but rather, the ghosts of Hell must visit heaven to be saved. 
We also learn that, due to the magnitude of infinite time, it has ceased to contain meaning. All of time is nothing more than the immediate moment, and the perception of time passing was just a way for the mortal mind of those who have not been accepted into Heaven to comprehend the act of being forgiven and accepted. 
The entire story ends with Lewis observing a glimpse of the infiniteness of time and Heaven, before being awoken at his desk in his home. He had simply nodded off while writing and it had all been a type of dream/vision. Before waking, his guide MacDonald, informs him of such and explains that the glimpse he saw before awaking is how all those in heaven see time, not linearly, but as a collective, and he also was simply provided the illusion of the forward progression of time in order to fully comprehend the events and the meaning of the two realms. 

## Analysis
I went into this book quite hesitant. I had heard that C.S. Lewis had written a few books about religion and there were obvious christian parallels within his Narnia series, but as a non-religious person, when I hear that a book is about religion, my first assumption is that it is a way to try and convince people who do not share someone's belief system to convert. This book, however, was not the preachy explination of a person's belief system that I was anticipating, but rather an exploration into Lewis's perception of what he thinks or hopes the afterlife could be. 
The core message that I took away from this story was that in order for a monothesitic God to truly be a power of infinite love and forgiveness, there cannot be a place of infinite cruelty and suffering without some way for those subjected to the torture to leave. In this story, Hell is not the place we imagine in stories like Dante's Inferno, where those who sinned are subjected to an eternity of pain and suffering. Rather, the torture of Hell is derived from an individual's desire to be tortured. If one simply accepts the forgiveness of God and embraces the infinite love and joy of Heaven, they will be allowed to enter the kingdom of God. 
We see in this story that almost all of the "ghosts" (etherial beings from Hell/Purgatory) refuse the help those who have come to offer aid. They are too stuck in earthly desires for riches, lust, and ego to let go of these and recieve the love, joy and satisfaction of Heaven. We do see a single instance of a ghost, tortured by a lizard that wants to keep him in Hell by whispering into his ear, accept the aid of an angel (different from the regular spirits that are trying to aid the other ghosts) and be transformed from the etherial being to a fully realized spirit. The lizard that was tormenting the ghost is also transformed into a horse after being crushed by the angel and we hear the sigh of relief from the Heavenly realm as it gains two more spirits to occupy its infinite area. 
Returning to the beginning of the book, when Lewis is in Purgatory/Hell, we get to see a vast array of people who all seem to be plagued by one or mroe vices that fall within or around the "Seven Deadly Sins" of Lust, Gluttony, Greed, Sloth, Wrath, Envy, and Pride. We get to see Gluttony, Greed, and Sloth in the beginning as the town is described as only containing run-down houses, some overflowing with junk, and stores of ill-repute, such as second-hand stores and tobbacco shops. The sin of sloth is more implied with the lack of people that Lewis runs across and the apparent emptiness of the streets before he reaches the line at the bus stop. At the bus stop, we get so see Pride, Wrath, Envy, Lust, and Greed (again) as the egos of some souls cause conflict, either verbally, or physically, which cause them to abandon the line. Greed and Envy are shown hand-in-hand as a woman attempts to bribe the person in front of her to trade places, only to be booted out of line as soon as money exchanges hands.
What I observe to be the depiction of Lust seems to have perhaps aged a bit poorly. Lewis briefly mentions the departure of two androgynous people from the line who are described as being a bit romantic towards each-other, but not displaying overly egrigious displays of lust (kissing, being handsy, etc.). It is mentioned that Lewis cannot differentiate the genders of either, which feels a bit odd as most other sins are quite obvious in the inhabitants of the town. To me, it almost feels as though if one does not fall into the standard gender binary, or may be queer, that is as sinful as being overly egotistical or starting fights for no good reason. While this may have been just the perception of how lust can be portrayed without describing an handsy man or a mention of sex, with the context of this being a religious book, it does feel a bit negative towards the queer community. Granted, this was written by a heavily religious man in the mid 1900's, and with the overall message of the book, it could have been a lot more critical of queer individuals. 

## Retrospective
After reading this book, and as I have recently read through Dante's Inferno (which was mentioned in this book), the first thing I realized was how C.S. Lewis wrote almost the direct opposite of Dante's signature work. While both can be interpreted as a headcanon of Christianity (probably the most literal use of that word), Dante's is much more of an ego-trip where he can release his greivances with the world and people around him, Lewis's work is much more thoughful and seems to explore the ideas within his religion rather than use it as a vessel to attack those who have done him harm. 
Besides the messaging, almost every aspect of the two stories seems to be directly opposing each other (or rather Lewis appears to have written the "anti-Dante's Inferno"). One of the most notible ways they differ is their individual depiction of the realm of "Hell". Dante's Hell is a place of endless suffering where the punishment seems to far outweigh the sin a majority of the time. Meanwhile, Lewis's Hell is indistinguishable from Purgatory, and the punishment for any sin is self imposed upon the soul being punished. Should one continue with their earthly sins, they will forever be relegated the place in which they are allowed, but must deal with the consequences of eternal boredom and dreariness. However, if one wishes to forego their harmful acts, they are welcomed with open arms to the kingdom of Heaven, and all of their sins are and have been forgiven. 
These two takes on the afterlife almost seem to mirror the two interpretations of Christianity and it's message. One explores the infinite patience, forgiveness, and love of an all-powerful God, while the other focuses on the punishment of sin and the "righteousness" of some aspects of Christianity. Dante appears to subscribe to the idea that Heaven is an exclusive club for only the most holy of people, and if anyone erred for even a second, they are destined for an eternity of torment and pain from which there is no escape, and the punishment is incredibly severe compared to the sin. C.S. Lewis, on the other hand, seems to believe in the ideals of Christianity of which I am also inclined towards.  
I would like to believe that if there were an all powerful God, he would be the infinitely kind and forgiving power that is shown in Lewis's "The Great Divorce". A God that is a power of infinite forgiveness and loves all, and the only barrier between Heaven and Hell is a personal choice to accept that love should be the way the afterlife is structured.